The oceans, they are always on
the move. Together, the ocean
basins are like a big
interconnected highway that
transports nutrients, carbon and
heat around the world. This
mesmerizing data visualization
of ocean currents was created
using a model called estimating
the circulation and climate of
the ocean, or ECCO, for short.
It's built using real world data
from satellites, buoys
and all kinds of other
measurements.
All of this movement starts with
physics.
Because the Earth is spinning,
the water feels something called
the Coriolis effect. This pushes
some of the strongest currents,
like the Gulf Stream and the
East Australian Current, against
the east side of the continents.
Because these currents wind up
on the west side of the ocean
basins they sit in, scientists
call them western boundary
currents. In this visualization,
the currents closer to the
surface are white and the deeper
currents are blue, almost like
you're seeing those deep
currents through the top layer
of water. But what's causing all
this motion and what makes some
water rise and some water sink?
Let's take a look. Here, we can
see the Pacific Ocean's
strongest current, the Kuroshio.
It begins in the warm, tropical
Philippine Sea, and then flows
north past Taiwan. After it
reaches Japan, it turns east and
heads across the Pacific Ocean,
spinning off huge eddies where
it turns right. The Kuroshio
carries over 200 times more
water than the world's largest
river, the Amazon. This
visualization makes it easy to
see how the ocean moves water
across the planet, but what's
hard to see are the places where
the water moves up or down. This
is called upwelling, or
downwelling. When upwelling
brings cold, deep nutrients into
the sunlight near the surface,
it creates a feeding ground for
all sorts of ocean life.
Nutrients carried, in part by
the Kuroshio Current, help feed
the fisheries in Japan and
create an important economic
zone for the country. Another
major western boundary current
is the Agulhas Current, which
carries water down the east
coast of Africa to its southern
tip, called Cape Agulhas. There,
the current makes a sharp turn
to the east, but sometimes it
pinches off giant eddies called
the Agulhas rings, which drift
west into the Atlantic. These
circular currents carry salt and
heat into the Atlantic and form
an important part of the
overturning circulation, also
called the Global Ocean conveyor
belt. This so called conveyor
belt is a system of currents
that carries heat northward,
across the equator and into the
North Atlantic. It plays a big
role in the climates of North
America, Europe and Africa.
Without it, winters in Europe
would be much colder, and
droughts in Africa more severe.
But the oceans do more than just
move heat around. In some
places, they absorb heat from
the sun, and in others, they
release it back to the air. We
can see that in the Gulf Stream,
yet another part of the ocean's
conveyor belt, the Gulf Stream
starts in the tropics, where the
water is very warm, as it drags
warm water up the east coast of
North America, it acts like a
heater for the atmosphere. By
the time this water has wandered
across the Atlantic and wrapped
around Europe, Iceland and
Greenland, it's gotten so cold
that it sinks deep into the
North Atlantic Ocean. But
temperature isn't the only thing
that can make water sink, so can
salt.Salinity or the amount of
salt in the water, can make it
heavy. The saltier and colder
water is, the heavier it gets.
As it gets warm and fresh water
gets lighter, changes in the
heaviness or density of ocean
water are what keep the ocean's
conveyor belt turning. Streaks
near the surface show how water
is moving from one place to
another. If you look close, you
can see below the surface.
Sometimes the water down deep is
moving in a different direction,
even the opposite direction.
Sometimes this cold, deep water
headed south beneath the Gulf
Stream is another part of that
same ocean conveyor belt that
keeps Europe warm. Some of that
warm Gulf stream water that
heads north at the surface
eventually winds up there,
moving south again after losing
so much heat to the atmosphere.
Eventually this cold, deep water
will spread around the globe and
slowly rise toward the surface.
There it will warm up in the sun
and get ready to start the trip
all over again.